+++
categories = ["reviews"]
date = "2016-03-28T17:08:56-04:00"
tags = ["review", "movie"]
title = "Zootopia: A Realm Review"

+++

As most poeple could guess, I sometimes have to go to work and… well… **work**. It was on one of these harrowing days that a corworker of mine decided that he’d had enough of our villainous occupation and invited me to join him in saying “fuck all” to the man, as we strode out of our office. At 7:30pm. We’re complete scoundrels, I’ll have you know. We marched on to the *Theatre de Movies* nearby and a wild girlfriend apparated among us along the way. My buddy - who we will call Matt (seems like a reasonably popular name, what are the chances it is his actual name?) - promised this kid’s movie was going to be good:<!--more-->

{{% spoiler %}}There is a DMV scene where all the workers are sloths, man.{{% /spoiler %}}

Alright, that is reasonably funny. Fine.

So we pulled up to this deserted theatre. We spent our entire week’s wage on the tickets, popcorn, drinks, and candy. Then we walked up and - after careful inspection of our tickets, the numerals on the two doors in front of us, and the differences between “1” and “2” - entered the correct room-with-a-projector-and-maybe-a-screen. Maybe 4 other people were also present. We plopped ourselves down in a row directly behind a completely mangled chair. It was probably destroyed by hooligans propping their feet on it from behind over the years. I promptly propped my feet upon it.{{< fnote >}}Following the legacy of storied hooligans before [me], and leaving further for the enjoyment of hooligan generations to come.{{< /fnote >}}

And so the movie began. I will try not to spoil anything too much, as that would be devilish and cruel. But if you’re too timid to read my review of the movie, you can simply skip down over it and read what this article is actually about anyways: how much I hate people (or something). But for now,

## The Review

{{% spoiler %}}
Zootopia is a your typical kid’s film devoted to having dreams, overcoming difficulties in pursuit of these dreams, and eventually achieving not only the dreams but the success and fame that relentless determination and likeability garners. It’s a beautiful myth told over and over by Disney, Dreamworks, Dixar, Dinosaurs, etc. However, the portrayal of **hard work** as significant is super important (at least, if you want to be successful): [Hard work should be a habit.](http://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2012/02/27/get-rich-with-good-old-fashioned-hard-work/).

Zootopia isn’t just about this myth. Zootopia tackles many problems and doesn’t have all the answers, either (see below). And - much like many of these kinds of films - it isn’t just for kids. There are definitely jokes that most kids won’t understand. There are themes that *hopefully* most kids don’t understand.  And it pulls this off without being oppressive. The movie bounds forward as relentless as the main character. It is fun, gripping, and real - more real than if it were humans being portrayed: we can relate to these animals in ways we can’t with humans.

The story is simply archaic, the personification of animals is unoriginal, the idea of a liberal utopia staled eons ago, and yet… everything is done so well that you can’t help be interested in the plight of the little rabbit. She wants to be a police officer. She wants to do good. Don’t we all? *throws up* After watching her succeed and fail and redeem herself, I do understand a little bit more about what it means to be human, vomiting and all.

The movie teaches some economics as well. A crafty fox makes a fortune by conning, being resourceful, clever marketing, and salesmanship. We could all learn a thing or two from that montage. He even evades paying taxes! And eventually works for the Uncle Sam himself! It’s glorious! Also, of course, he gets the girl. One thing left out of the Zootopia universe is the question of inter-species mating… does it exist? What abomination are the going to (pro)create?

The rest of the universe is solidly built, like a Ford F-9050 (would be{{< fnote >}}Because 9000. And being over that.{{< /fnote >}})TODO: add pic of the earth roamer mobile thing. The movie is rife with tiny details, from the actual size differences between animals, to outfits/accessories designed for specific types of animals, to the DMV being a known threshold to hell itself. More on this below.

In conclusion: go see the film about animals and a better human you will become. In the process, enjoy the delightfulness.
{{% /spoiler %}}

## Zootopia: The Universe with Universal Problems

I suppose all universes have universal problems, hence the word. I’m sure anyone that watched the movie has an idea of what I’m about to talk here, though perhaps not specifically.

Issues in Zootopia parallel issues that we humans have in our own world. One of the central tenants of the film is the relationships that each species have against other species, as well as the collective **prey** versus **predator** clash. We can clearly draw similarities between racism in our world and this… specie-ism in Zootopia. This is easy and unprofound. There are some <del>animals</del> people out there that are complaining about the metaphors and their lack of realistic parallelism… to which I say:

> Who gives a flying fuck?

I’ll explain why I don’t.

### Firstly,

there are more subtle relationships between the Zootopia social paradigm and ours which would be more interesting to analyze. {{% fnote "[+]" %}}NOTE: I am definitely **not** saying that racism is not a topic that constantly needs discussing and addressing, nor even that it is uninteresting to draw these parallels and analyze what the movie has to say about the topic.{{%/ fnote %}} However, I don’t even really want to talk about these either. What I find more interesting (and, yes, profound) is how Zootopia creates a universe with a unique social paradigm and shows that some classes of problems transcend our realm, and may permeate into every realm (well here I am talking about it, so clearly this must be the case).

What the fuck am I talking about?

Zootopia’s universe has these issues:

- (as previously mentioned) Specie-ism
- (as previously mentioned) X-ivore-ism (what people eat)
- Size-ism (mostly seen as specie-ism, but may in fact be also separate)
- Others, including some sexism, and some weird specific hate against Foxes, which I can only think of as the “wily” nature in addition to the predator classification

All of these issues (and ones that I didn’t mention) exist because of the nature of the beasts involved, the groundwork and historical contexts that the creators developed, and the obvious logical social ramifications of personifying the animals in the story.

I say *obvious* because, if one were to create the world separate from any social understanding of how the animals would interact, but completely intact with history and animal behavior as we understand it in our worlds, I believe a logical stop on the thought express would be at the current phase that we see Zootopia existing in. So not… obvious, but… something.{{< fnote "[+]" >}}<em>define:</em> <strong>obvious</strong> ><br><br>...something{{< /fnote >}}

That probably made no sense. So allow me to explain a little less abstractly: Zootopia is a universe entirely believable (alright, insofar as animals have *evolved* to create this all-inclusive society, speak the same language, have a police force not dominated solely by <del>rats</del>) due to its depth of detail, the logical progression of its society(-ies), and the issues that would arise from its context and universe.

So to get back to why I don’t give a fuck about the exactness of the movie’s metaphors: Zootopia isn’t a reflection of our world, it is a world completely its own. The fact that it can have these messages we tie back to the real world without a direct and exact parallel means the creators did a **fantastic** job, not a mediocre one. Obviously they care about the real world problems else they wouldn’t have stressed the similar problems that their world has. The movie is *better* because it doesn’t reflect 1:1. Anybody can do that. Instead, they built a universe that has problems that *look* like problems we have, that we can think about and apply to the real world. I’m having trouble asserting my message here, and it bothers me, but I must continue.

### Secondly,

I don’t give a fuck about those reviews because those reviewers are *complainy-pants*{{% fnote "[+]" %}}[Thanks again, Mr. Money Mustache](http://www.mrmoneymustache.com/){{% /fnote %}}.

## Additional Thoughts

