+++
categories = ["x"]
date = "2016-06-06T23:12:40-04:00"
tags = ["x"]
title = "2016 06 06 zootopia"

+++


## Prelude

This article has taken me aeons{{% fnote %}}Assuming an aeon is equal to some number of days less than one month, as I started the venture around two months ago.{{% /fnote %}} to complete. I wrote way more than I’m finally publishing, with many remarks you won’t read or know about. Suffice to say, I’ve given up on eloquently laying out all of my ideas and thoughts, instead deciding to put *something* out into the wild again. I can always revisit this at some point in the distant future… though we have seen so far how well I do on that front… 

I wanted to get into the gory details, and my own interpretations regarding size-ism and species-ism and the interesting messages and problems that arise. I wanted to tailor these issues as relevant to our world… but I got sidetracked by other things. Notably, I got hit broadside with a review that made me write mostly about how *irrelevant* the details are to our world. Let’s be clear from the start: everything pertains to real life, as we only perceive things that exist. With that vague and unhelpful message, let’s get started…<!--more-->

## Introduction

As most people could guess, I sometimes have to go to work and… well… **work**. It was on one of these harrowing days that a coworker of mine decided he’d had enough of our villainous occupation{{% fnote "[+]"%}}Actually we like our jobs and it is quite non-villainous… please don’t fire me!{{% /fnote %}} and invited me to say "fuck all" to the man; we strode out of the office, middle fingers confidently, if metaphorically, in the air. At 7:30pm. We’re complete deviants and scoundrels. We marched on to the *Theatre de Movies* nearby and a wild girlfriend apparated among us along the way. My buddy - who we will call Matt (seems like a reasonably popular name, what are the chances it is his actual name?) - promised this kid’s movie was going to be good:<!--more-->

{{% spoiler %}}There is a DMV scene where all the workers are sloths, man. Check out the trailer: {{< youtube bY73vFGhSVk >}}{{% /spoiler %}}

Alright, that is reasonably funny, let’s see if the movie pans out.

We pulled up to this deserted theatre and spent our entire week’s wage on the tickets, popcorn, drinks, and candy. Then we walked up and - after careful inspection of our tickets, the numerals on the two doors in front of us, and the differences between "1" and "2" - entered the correct room-with-a-projector-and-maybe-a-screen. Four other people were present. We plopped ourselves down in a row directly behind a completely mangled chair, probably destroyed by hooligans propping their feet on it from behind over the years. I promptly propped my feet upon it.{{< fnote >}}Following the legacy of storied hooligans before [me], and leaving further destruction for the enjoyment of hooligan generations to come.{{< /fnote >}}

And so the movie began. I will try not to spoil anything too much, as that would be devilish and cruel. But I can’t talk about anything I want to without referencing the movie and its scenes… so I made a spoiler box!

## The Review

{{% spoiler %}}
Zootopia is your typical kid’s film devoted to having dreams, overcoming difficulties in pursuit of those dreams, and eventually achieving not only the dreams but the success and fame that relentless determination and likeability garners. It’s a beautiful myth told over and over by Disney, Dreamworks, Dixar, etc. However, the portrayal of **hard work** as significant is itself significant (at least, if you want to be successful): [Hard work should be a habit.](http://www.mrmoneymustache.com/2012/02/27/get-rich-with-good-old-fashioned-hard-work/).

Zootopia is about much more than this myth. It tackles many problems and doesn’t have all the solutions. And - much like many "kid’s" films - it isn’t just for kids. There are definitely jokes that most kids won’t understand. There are themes that *hopefully* most kids don’t understand.  And it pulls it off without being oppressive. The movie bounds forward as relentlessly as the main character. It is fun, gripping, and real - more real than if it were humans being portrayed: we can relate to these animals in ways we can’t with humans (more on this later).

The story is archaic, the personification of animals unoriginal, the idea of a liberal utopia that’s not so utopian as it seems has eons ago staled, and yet… everything is done so well that you can’t help be interested in the plight of the little rabbit. She wants to be a police officer. She wants to do good. Don’t we all? *throws up* After watching her succeed and fail and redeem herself, I do understand a little bit more about what it means to be human, vomiting and all. {{% fnote "[+]" %}}And I suppose she is an inspiring character, after all…{{% /fnote %}}

The movie teaches economics as well. A crafty fox makes a fortune through conning, resourcefulness, clever marketing, and salesmanship. We could all learn a thing or two from that montage. He even evades paying taxes, and eventually works for the Uncle Sam himself! It’s glorious! Also, of course, he gets the girl. One thing left out of the Zootopia universe is the question of inter-species mating… does it exist? What <del>abomination</del>beautiful being are they going to (pro)create?

The rest of the universe is solidly built, like a Ford F-9050 (would be{{< fnote >}}Because 9000. And being over that.{{< /fnote >}})TODO: add pic of the earth roamer mobile thing. The movie is rife with tiny details, from the actual size differences between animals, to outfits/accessories designed for specific types of animals, to the DMV being a known threshold to hell itself.

In conclusion: go see the film about animals and a better human you’ll become. In the process, enjoy the delightfulness.
{{% /spoiler %}}

## The Quasi-political Discussion

### An Article I Disagree With

I lied, this isn’t a discussion (well, not until people comment, anyways). I want to bring up a review from someone else on the internet. [This review](http://birthmoviesdeath.com/2016/03/03/zootopia-review-a-muddled-mess-of-racial-messaging...-and-cute-animals), not that you need read it, because I will summarize it much better here:

> Zootopia is an odd movie that is dangerous because allegories are flawed (though I won’t mention this and only harp on the fact that the allegories used to reflect on real life in this movie are disastrous and muddled and out-of-control, much like this garbled mess of a sentence within these parentheses). I’m going to extrapolate wildly about the creators and their clear disregard for racial and historical contexts, and unabashedly claim their metaphors to be confused when really… I am the confused.

He takes issue with the film portraying a minority class-of-species that are *predators*, because this is obviously a 1:1 analogy for African Americans. This is problematic as he describes better than I could, but basically boils down to "Zootopia shows Blacks as violent! Zootopia appeals to racists everywhere!"

Additionally, he believes there are too many metaphors, and that this causes the movie to become out of control. He thinks because it is difficult to parallel every metaphor and reality (using a singular application) the creators didn’t know what the hell they were doing. They muddled their message. This breakdown causes the author to conclude that Zootopia fails to deliver a sound allegorical moral to its viewers.

## Why I Disagree

There are many reasons I disagree with the analysis of the author, but really it’s a simple difference in approach: I believe any allegory, metaphors, and interpretation must first be abstracted from the world of Zootopia, *then* applied to reality. The author believes the connections are immediate. I’m perturbed with the author’s belief that the creators of the movie:

- Didn’t know what they were doing by creating many *confused* metaphors
- Have no notion of historical and racial contexts

The metaphors are not confused; the author is confused. By attempting to apply a subset of reality to every metaphor, the author is - at best - only able to create tenuous relationships. This interpretation he blames on the creators. I think that’s a bit rude. You see…

### Interpretation is a Viewer Activity / There are no 1:1 mappings

The film clearly has an allegorical message in mind, or at least strives to pique analytical minds to think about its problems and how they relate to the real world. However, the creators necessarily concentrate on the story and the world-building first, because an unbelievable world will have no credible value to deal with real problems. Assuming efficacy of some allegory is the creators’ intent, they must create a sensical story scoped and consistent within their fantastical world.

Often viewers will not find the same messages that an author intended. This happens even when a story is well-constructed, and there is nothing wrong with this. Indeed, a variety of perspective should be celebrated. However, the key point is that the creators had both a message and a story to tell, and one encompasses the other. This is important for abstraction, which the author ultimately lacks in his approach.

The author desperately wants there to be 1:1 mappings from Zootopia to reality, but the truth is this would water down the the movie. Actually, it would water down the entirety of the message that the author is so keen on finding. The creators must allow their world’s problems to coalesce from the world itself, not ours. This is a fundamental advantage of using fantasy (or Sci-Fi) as your genre.

## My Approach

If this reviewer has gone so woefully astray, you ask, then what do I suggest as a more responsible approach to understanding allegorical stories? To begin, some background:

### All Allegories Fail

Let’s use Google to define *allegory* so we have a baseline to work with:

> a story, poem, or picture that can be interpreted to reveal a hidden meaning, typically a moral or political one.

First of all, I want to point out the word *interpreted*. We’ve already used this a bunch, but perhaps we should define it as well?

> [to] understand (an action, mood, or way of behaving) as having a particular meaning or significance.

Everyone interprets things differently. Sure. Yawn. We can see that the hidden meanings of allegories depend strongly on the viewer doing the interpreting. However, more significantly, any message or interpretation requires a level of *abstraction*:

> the process of considering something independently of its associations, attributes, or concrete accompaniments.

This is because we don’t live in the world where the associations, attributes, and concrete accompaniments are extant; we don’t live in Zootopia, but our own reality{{% fnote %}}I suppose with enough LSD someone’s reality could eventually become Zootopia; furries everywhere are now searching for LSD dealers...{{% /fnote %}}. The best we can do is abstract. As a computer scientist, I’m very aware of a problem that abstractions have: they are *leaky*. Read about the [Law of Leaky Abstractions](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/LeakyAbstractions.html) if you are interested. What matters here is that - unless you live in Zootopia - there is an unavoidable leak caused by interpreting and abstracting the allegory and applying it to real life. Thus, due to this leak, no matter what message you find, it is assuredly **not** the **exact** message from the allegory. And that really is the problem: allegories necessitate reflection, by which assumptions must be made, which thus creates a lack of exactness. If you want an allegory to be exact, you must simply state it as it is: which defeats the whole point of an allegory.

That isn’t to say that we should avoid writing allegories or using metaphors; in fact their use enriches all mediums. It is, however, important to remember when trying to draw conclusive, direct connections from art to reality.

## World Building

I’ve mentioned the world of Zootopia at least 1000 times by now. As a fantasy piece, especially one where the characters are not human, it is very important to do proper world-building. As viewers, we must be able to understand how the world works, how the characters interact, what the social paradigms are like, etc. We should be able to contemplate the world and surmise issues that might be pertinent. We should be able to see where the problems the movie presents come from; nothing should feel forced or out of place. This is especially true in the fantasy realm: reality is stranger than fiction. If it doesn’t make sense, then the story loses its credibility.

Nothing is perfect, of course, but in general the movie stands up and makes narrative sense. The creators persuaded me the plot *could* happen. And to me, the message was clear. However, the creators never told me what they wanted to say; they showed me. All they can do is guide your interpretation; they cannot force their ideas down your throat (though they may try). It is a bit irresponsible as a viewer, knowing all of this, to directly correlate in a 1:1 fashion. However keen the analogy may be, it will break down in some manner. Even if the story was a direct retelling of another, something would be lost in translation. *And something would be gained.*

Within Zootopia, many different issues are tackled; but they pertain only to Zootopia itself. The plethora of metaphors necessitate abstraction into ideas, and the rules by which the world exists and is created from allows us to undertake this task. A responsible analyst would understand that the ideas matter, and try to discern them, not get lost spinning an untenable web of direct connections to and fro. Some things make sense if you apply *this* section of reality; others make sense applying *that* section; they all make sense applied to Zootopia itself.

So what is the message (well, at least one important and relevant to the article)? I don’t think I can better state one of the larger issues Zootopia tackles than a commenter on the author’s own article:

> [it is not] specifically coding racial minorities to the predators, but it was an attempt to show how **stereotyping and prejudices in general are all misconceptions born of fear that should not be treated as fact.**

Thank you, VyceVictus. Let’s apply this idea, this moral, to real life. I think the creators of Zootopia would like that.

## A Little More on Abstraction and Sci-Fi / Fantasy

The last sentence above *should* conclude this post, but I’m not done gibbering. Feel free, gracious readers, to stop here and continue no further into matters I have already discussed above. For those of you who want to be beaten down again with the skeleton of a long dead mule, carry on…

The Sci-Fi and Fantasy genres are awesome{{% fnote %}}Fact.{{% /fnote %}}. Since the beginning of recorded history we have had legends and mythologies that - although mayhaps not considered *fantastical* by the people in its own time and culture - are most definitely Fantasy. People can create a layer between themselves and the story via the fantastical elements; they craft a lens for perception based on themselves and the differences between reality and the story’s worlds. This provides an escape for readers, allowing them to view and think about *things* in a different way than they might normally. This trait has been vital for writers forever and have allowed analogies to exist, shedding light on interesting ideas by plugging in a new lamp.

The escape not only allows us to relate to fictional characters, but even non-human entities and ideas. When I look at <name of character> I don’t see a white, country girl; I see a fucking rabbit. And yet, I relate to her possibly more than I would if she was that country girl (who I undoubtedly have more in common with than...a rabbit); I relate purely to my perception of her actions, words, and beliefs. Fantasy can therefore allow a pure picture of characters and relationships by not being hung up on reality’s baggage.

Science Fiction is notorious for providing thought experiments, usually in the form of dystopia. Many of them focus on the culture and politics to show a clear tie between our own cultures and politics.

> What happens when you take Capitalism/Corporatism/Consumerism too far?

is a popular question for Sci-Fi writers to tackle. Often the more science-fiction-y the story the more concrete the message. It’s easy to abstract out the core when that message is the world itself; I don’t want to live in the universe of *Hunger Games*.

By focusing on the creation of these universes, writers don’t get bogged down. They can paint a clean image that shows something that will never be. And that is just grand: reality is a fucking mess; we need an escape.

## Conclusion

Abstract. Interpret. Apply. Don’t drown under the details of a story and how those details must necessarily align perfectly with your own. What is the author showing you? Look at their creation as a whole (especially with Fantasy and Science Fiction) before you speculate on why they’re an idiot and their ideas are shite. There is a single piece of primary text: use it. Don’t be afraid to draw conclusions, of course, or to seek meaning from allegories; be mindful of your correlations. Abstraction is key.

Zootopia is a great movie - just look at the reviews! It came out of nowhere, in my own uninformed opinion, and I cherish it more than I should. I’ve already reviewed it somewhere up there, but I want to reiterate how well the creators did to build up their universe. I wish the denizens of it good fortune as they listen to other-worldly music on their radios and attempt to grasp the meaning of \<insert lyric from one of the songs that was playing\>.

Cheers,

Panarchus

